Before I begin, I want to wish everyone a beautiful, cozy Autumn. From someone who is blessed to call Scotland home, the foreseeable sharp, bitter cold that threads its way into the landscape more prominently this time of year has undoubtedly made its presence known. My wool coat, a non-negotiable when the outdoors calls for my appearance: warmth-filled spaces, in both a physical and creative sense - coffee shops, the library, and a friend’s home - are integral essentials for nurturing the internal furnace in the colder months.

Those subtle, nurturing, evocative spaces mentioned act as a guide to the topic of conversation for this essay, the third place. The third place coined by Ray Oldenburg, who defined the concept as:

    'A generic designation for a great variety of public places that host the regular, voluntary, informal, and happily anticipated gatherings of individuals beyond the realms of home and work’

It can be argued that, although this definition offers a broad sociological understanding, the third place being a public or semi-public space beyond the work-home customary environment, with deeper analysis, the ‘third space’ is entirely individual, reflective of our own rhythm and needs. Within an age in which community feels more out of reach than within grasp, the importance of a third place is greater now more than ever. In a previous article, ‘When did we become so anti-social?’ I explored the concept of anti-socialism and the impact it’s having on our society:

I recognise that this outlook can be proposed as one of individual perception, drawn entirely from my own experience, and should be taken as such. However, in relation to the third space, I believe it holds weight: a third space is built on the very foundations of community, and without that core, there is no third place.

In recent years, highlighted by our understandable, enforced deprivation of human touch during COVID, antisocial behaviour seems to be a frequent philosophy adopted by many. Anti-socialism: a paradoxical ethos that goes against our very biology. To seek a third space is to align with your fundamental cognitive needs; it is significant to highlight that, as previously mentioned, the third space is entirely individual. I do not mean to advocate the ideology that, in order to connect with both yourself and others, you must frequent the busiest clubs in your city, no. I encourage you to explore spaces where you encounter both comfort and discomfort; environments that encourage inspiration, social engagement, and reflection, but also unfamiliarity, the sense of ‘being out of routine’, to extend growth.

    “Having a third place, where someone knows my name or recognises my face, keeps me connected. It’s so easy to shut off, to feel alone in the face of everything, but sharing a kind word with a stranger reminds me to stay empathetic. Third places invite me to open myself up to external experiences, and ask me to examine my values and how I hold them in the presence of strangers.” - The good Trade

For myself, my third spaces include many a local cafe, I’m on a first-name basis with a collection of baristas at this point, and I can’t find it within myself to feel shame for it; local wine bars, restaurants, the library, and Waterstones. I felt the need to highlight that last one by name, as I spend an almost unhealthy amount of time within its walls with friends, hunting for our next read. My friends and I dedicate time to meeting, for as short or long as our schedules allow; what matters is not the time, but the company and the intent to seek each other out. Through these engagements, outside of the work-home cycle, I have met strangers who are now friends - a friend of a friend who has now become a friend of mine. A moment of trust between individuals, to share valued space with more than the usual company, is what third spaces are all about. It’s about using that established, inviting environment to strengthen and extend the community.

In expansion of the third space concept, a fourth space has also been a topic of conversation among some sociologists and theorists, with the introduction of the digital age. A space in which the line between a physically based community and a more internal, digitally inspired one blurs. A few ideas that could represent this space include online creative spaces or co-working cafes and offices - collaborative environments that support connection and growth, without the physical demand. It’s a concept of fluidity; location no longer a tether, it offers community beyond traditional public spaces.

In this new digital age, maybe that is a conversation that requires more discussion, a safe online space maintained for people to gather, like Substack, for example. Or maybe it’s a notion we should argue against: maybe the third space, where we physically connect with one another, is one we should continue to promote. Or do we also recognise that not everyone has the privilege of an easily navigable third space? Is the accessibility of the internet a model we should take advantage of? To advocate for a more evolved understanding of community ? Who knows, maybe that is a debate for another day. For now, I extend a question to you: Is there a third or fourth space in which you have found comfort?

Maeve 𝜗ৎ

I wanted to add on to this article.

After seeing many of you in the comments highlight how the library is a key inspirational third place, it has drawn forth a memory of how the library became such an important space for me.

My grandad, has always been someone in my life that has encouraged my growth, learning and goals. As a young child, he would take my brother and I to our local library, once a week, where we would excitedly pick out a book to read— Cathy Cassidy or Jaqueline Wilson were always favourites of mine.

My grandad always highlighted the importance of the Library and throughout the years continued to advocate the significance of paying my local libraries a visit. It makes me so happy to see so many of you finding comfort within the walls of your library, and it encourages me to protect my grandad’s wisdom by upholding his support of the Library— and extending to you the push you may need to pay your local library a visit x

This Substack is reader-supported. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.